# REATAURANT GUEST MOBILE APPLICATION
This Android application is part of the full ['Restaurant Guest Software System'](https://github.com/users/RonnieLutaro/projects/5), a name that was originally given to this system as part of the naming process for a project title. Traditionally, this kind of system would be referred to as a Restaurant Operations Management System.

## Inspiration
Small businesses in Uganda are faced with customer management challenges that lead to business failure as stated in a [research](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/291863118_Causes_of_small_business_failure_in_Uganda_A_case_study_from_Bushenyi_and_Mbarara_towns) that was carried out by (Kazooba, 2006).
Research was conducted on 133 small business enterprises including **restaurants**, bars, hotels, and others, it turns out that most of the small businesses in Uganda fail due to a number of factors that result from management problems, inadequate control of inventory, delays in processing applications among others (Kazooba, 2006). The Idea to develop an innovative solution that solves the challenge of small Restaurant business failure gave birth to the 'Restaurant Guest Software System'. 

This System makes use of a Mobile Application and a Real-time Analytics [Dashboard](https://github.com/RonnieLutaro/restaurant-guest-dashboard). Both the Dashboard and Mobile application consume a [Web API service](https://github.com/RonnieLutaro/restaurant-guest-dashboard). The project was originally intended at providing a more efficient way of managing business operations and Customer Experience for Restaurants within locality of my University. This vision has since grown and my intention is to now develop a more efficient way to manage restaurant business process and customer experience. 

## Impact of the solution
Most of my research was narrowed down to 'Bobics Restaurant' as a case study. Bobics is a small business restaurant located in Mukono town, Uganda. The restaurant is located just a few meters away from a major University, [Uganda Christian University](https://wwww.ucu.ac.ug/). This restaurant's biggest customer segment are the University students. Most of the students are youth and possess mobile smartphones purposely to communicate with their classmates, family, and access course resources over platforms like Email, WhatsApp, University ELearning System, among many others.
For many people, smartphones have become an extension of themselves. Now running on over 2 billion monthly-active devices, Android is the most common smartphone operating system in use world-wide, with users installing an average of 50 apps each, resulting in over 94 billion apps downloaded from the Play app store in 2017 alone according to Reto Meier and Ian Lake in their book Professional Android.
Ubiquitous and indispensable, smartphones are so advanced and personal that studies have shown people become anxious if they misplace their device, lose connectivity, or run low on battery.
According to a survey carried out by ZDNet, 5.7 hours is the average time spent by millennials on phones each day, while baby boomers devote 5 hours to smartphone use. However 13% of millennial and 5% of boomers say that they spend over 12 hours every day on their phones. 

The main problem faced at Bobics restaurant is inefficient and insufficient work force to serve a large number of customers, especially during peak hours. Increasing the workforce just to solve peak hour problem, is not economical as it decreases the total profitability of the restaurant. The current system at Bobics restaurant is paper based. Papers are used in the restaurant for displaying the traditional menu cards, writing down the orders of customers, storing the records of customers. Customers make long queues before placing their orders as the waiter records customer orders using the traditional pen and paper. The customers then must wait until their order is ready and is then delivered. This process takes up a lot of time, human effort and is also prone to human error. The problem with paper-based systems are that papers can get easily be damaged by stain marks; they can be lost due to fire or accidents or can get lost in general. Hence, time and money are wasted. As traditional menu cards are paper based, any changes that need to be made in the menu will require reprinting of the entire menu card, leading to wastage. For small changes, reprinting the entire menu card is costly since the changes are not dynamic. It is inefficient to access a particular record from the stack of papers. This system is time consuming. One must call a waiter several times till he notices it and wait for him to arrive at their table to take their order. Also, the waiter can misinterpret the customer’s order since he is writing the order on paper, and the case of serving a wrong dish is possible. Wrong order processing due to the human mistake will cause wastage of food and increase the operating budget. For placing any orders customers must visit restaurants to know about food items and then place order and pay. While placing an order over the phone, customer lacks the physical copy of the menu item, lack of visual confirmation that the order was placed correctly. In the existing system, time and manual work is required. 

With all this information put into consideration, a software solution that capitalized on mobile smartphone usage by the restaurant's biggest customer segment was accounted for as the best canditate.
The 'Restaurant Guest Mobile Application' will enable the Restaurant's customers to be able to access their favorite restaurant's available menu items, place their oders and have them processed through the 'Restaurant Guest Mobile Application' over the Android platform. The customers can either decide to takeaway or have their order home delivered based on their preference and address that is for the most part student Hostels located around or near Uganda Christian University.

## How to set up
### Install Android studio
In order to start configuring , you need to install Android studio and the 'Java SE Development Kit'.
Make sure that you have installed the latest version of android studio 3.+, if not please download it from this [Link](https://developer.android.com/studio/index.html)
### Import Android Project

1. To import, simply open Android Studio and use the (Get from Version Control) action, provide the repository url and make sure to wait for all the processes (the Gradle Build) to complete before continuing to the next step.
2. If you get a popup that prompts you to sync gradle click on OK , then wait until the import is done
3. Now navigate to your firebase console ,create a new project with the same package name so you can enable the push noification api
4. If everything went well, firebase will generate a google-service.json file, download it and put it in your computer
5. Open your android studio , then go to google-service.json and change it with the new one , now sync your project
6. Return to the firebase console to get the firebase key , settings > Cloud messaging > copy your server key and past it in your dashboard field

**Note :**
Please don't update your gradle version to the latest version , this may cause a lot of issues after this transaction. After compiling the source code in android studio you will be faced with the following message "Failed to resolve: play-services-auth", it's caused by the google-services.json that should be generated on firebase console and placed on the android project folder
